---
title: Study Guide for Unit 7
sidebar:
  nav: guide-en
aside:
  toc: true
---

## Topics

## Raid 

### Improvement of Reliability via Redundancy:

Reliability Concerns: Failure of a single disk in a system with many disks is more likely than failure of any specific disk alone, posing a significant risk of data loss.

Introducing Redundancy: To address this, redundancy is introduced, storing extra information not typically needed but vital for rebuilding lost data in case of disk failure.

Mirroring Technique: The simplest method, mirroring, duplicates every disk, creating pairs where every write is carried out on both disks. Data can be retrieved from the surviving disk if one fails, significantly reducing the risk of data loss.

Calculating Mean Time to Failure: The mean time to failure of a mirrored disk system depends on the mean time to failure of individual disks and the mean time to repair, resulting in significantly increased reliability.

Considerations: Despite increased reliability, factors like power failures and natural disasters can affect the assumption of independent disk failures. However, mirrored-disk systems still offer higher reliability compared to single-disk systems.

### Improvement in Performance via Parallelism:

Parallel Access Benefits: Parallel access to multiple disks improves read request handling, effectively doubling the rate at which read requests can be processed.

Data Striping Techniques: Data can be striped across multiple disks, either at the bit level or block level, to further enhance transfer rates.

Bit-level Striping: Bits of each byte are split across multiple disks, significantly increasing data transfer rates for each access.

Block-level Striping: Treats disks as a single large disk, assigning logical blocks to disks and fetching multiple blocks in parallel, optimizing data transfer rates for large reads.

Advantages of Block-level Striping: Offers higher throughput for block reads and lower latency for single block reads compared to bit-level striping, making it the preferred choice in practical systems.

### Summary of Parallelism Goals:

Load-Balancing: Parallelism aims to balance multiple small accesses across disks to increase throughput.

Reduced Response Time: It also aims to parallelize large accesses to reduce response time, enhancing overall system performance.