---
title: Study Guide for DBS101
sidebar:
  nav: guide-en
aside:
  toc: true
---

## Topics

### Entity Relationship Diagarm 

#### Reducing ER Diagram to Relational Schemas


1. Strong entity sets are converted to relations with attributes corresponding to the entity set attributes. The primary key of the entity set becomes the primary key of the relation.
2. Weak entity sets are converted to relations with attributes corresponding to the entity set attributes plus the primary key attributes of the owner entity set. The primary key consists of the owner entity set's primary key plus the weak entity's discriminator. A foreign key constraint is added referencing the owner entity set.
3. Relationship sets are converted to relations with attributes made up of the union of the primary keys of the participating entity sets. Descriptive attributes of the relationship set are also included. The primary key consists of the primary key of one of the participating entity sets if the relationship set is many-to-one or one-to-one. Foreign key constraints are added referencing the participating entity sets.
4. Multivalued attributes become relations with an attribute for the multivalued attribute and attributes for the primary key of the entity set. A foreign key constraint references the entity set relation.
5. Redundant relationship set relations can be eliminated, like those between a weak entity set and its owner entity set.
6. Relation schemas can be combined when there is a many-to-one relationship set between two entity sets and one entity set's participation is total. The primary key of the combined relation is that of the entity set into which the other set was merged
7. Composite attributes in entity sets are converted to separate attributes for each component of the composite attribute. There is no separate attribute for the composite attribute itself.



