---
title: Practical 6 - Indexing
sidebar:
  nav: pract-en
aside:
  toc: true
---
# Guided Session

You are given a task by your project manager to create a database using a dataset containing pixar flims data from 1995 to 2024. This database will serve and application that pixar will use to advertise its repository. 

## Task 1: Create a new database for Pixar films

```javascript
CREATE DATABASE films;
```

## Task 2 : Identify relevant tables 

- Atleast 7 tables to account for each input file
- More tables can be made to take into account the relations between tables and some categories(multivalued attributes) that need their own table.

## Task 3 : Load input data into the tables

Important Note!: You might have to modify the input using other programming languages for the inputs to be usable for your tables.

## Task 4 : Design scenarios where an application developer has to modify or retrieve data from the database. Implement SQL queries that complement these scenarios.

## Task 5: In the above database identify atleast 5 useful indexes and implement them. Use the Explain() method to show whether your index is being used for some queries.



# Practical 6 Exercise

## Task 1: Implement the following operations in  B+ tree using any programming language.

### Insertion
Inserting a new value into a B+ tree follows these steps:
- Search for the Leaf Node: Start from the root and traverse down the tree to find the appropriate leaf node where the new value should be inserted.
- Insertion into Leaf Node: Insert the new value into the leaf node in a sorted order. If the leaf node overflows, split it into two nodes and promote the middle value to the parent node.
- Propagate Changes Upwards: If the parent node of the leaf node overflows due to the split, apply the same splitting process recursively until the root if necessary.

Example, Let's say we have a B+ tree with an order of 3:
- Inserting 8 into the tree:
  - Traverse down to the leaf node containing values 7 and 9, then insert 8 between them.
  - If the leaf node overflows, split it and promote the middle value (8) to the parent node.

### Deletion
Deleting a value from a B+ tree involves:
- Search for the Value: Traverse down the tree to find the leaf node containing the value to be deleted.
- Delete from Leaf Node: Remove the value from the leaf node. If the node underflows, borrow a value from adjacent nodes or merge nodes.
- Propagate Changes Upwards: Update parent nodes if necessary due to underflow.

Example:
- Deleting 4 from the B+ tree:
  - Traverse down to the leaf node containing 4 and remove it.
  - If the leaf node underflows, borrow a value from an adjacent node or merge nodes.

### Updation
Updating a value in a B+ tree combines deletion and insertion:
- Delete the Old Value: Follow the deletion process to remove the old value from the tree.
- Insert the New Value: Insert the new value into the tree using the insertion process.

Example:
- Updating 6 to 10 in the B+ tree:
  - Delete 6 from the tree.
  - Insert 10 into the tree.


## Task 2: Write a program(In any programming language) to demonstrate multilevel indexing and explain how multilevel indexing works.

## Task 3:  Write optimized indexed structures

One of the drawbacks of the B+ tree index structure is that its performance can be poor with random writes. If the index is too large to fit in memory and writes or inserts are done in an order that does not match the sort order of the index, each write/insert is likely to touch a different leaf node. If the number of leaf nodes is significantly larger than the buffer size, most of these leaf accesses would require a random read operation, as well as a subsequent write operation to write the updated leaf page back to disk. On a system with a magnetic disk, this can lead to a very low write/insert rate due to the high access time. Even on systems with faster SSDs, page writes still have a significant cost due to the expensive page erase operation. Therefore, the basic B+-tree structure is not ideal for applications that need to support a very large number of random writes/inserts per second.

Several alternative index structures have been proposed to handle workloads with
a high write/insert rate. The log-structured merge tree or LSM tree and its variants are
write-optimized index structures that have seen very significant adoption. The buffer
tree is an alternative approach, which can be used with a variety of search tree structures.


- Propose any index structure with high write/insert rate.
- Explain how these index structures are a better alternative.
- Implement the index structure using python.
